JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
ALISON STEWART: And I'm Alison
Stewart.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
the future of health care in the
balance.
President Obama and vice
president-elect Pence
head to the Hill to make their
case to lawmakers.
ALISON STEWART: Also ahead this
Wednesday,
the second part of Judy's
conversation with
CIA Director John Brennan,
looking ahead to
the Trump administration's
relationship with
Russia and U.S. intelligence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, from Iraq,
as the battle
for Mosul continues, residents
flee to camps
where security concerns are
ripping families
apart.
BELKIS WILLE, Human Rights
Watch: Now, all
of them might be in official
detention facilities,
and maybe the moment the
operation is done,
we will see a lot of these
people released.
But, for the moment, we don't
know that, and
all their families know is that
they have
gone missing.
ALISON STEWART: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The battle over
repealing Obamacare
has been joined at the U.S.
Capitol tonight.
Both the sitting president and
the incoming
vice president were there,
making their cases
for reprieve or repeal.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: At the Capitol,
President
Obama and vice president-elect
Pence were
minutes apart in arrival, and
light years
apart in purpose.
Mr. Obama, in a private meeting
with Democrats,
urged them to defend his
signature health
care law.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Hello, everybody.
Happy new year.
LISA DESJARDINS: While a few
floors up, Mr.
Pence rallied his former
Republican colleagues
in the House to dismantle it.
He said afterward that
Republicans are paying
attention to how to avoid ripple
effects of
repeal, for individuals and the
market.
MIKE PENCE (R), Vice
President-Elect: We're
working right now, the White
House staff is,
on a series of executive orders
that will
enable that orderly transition
to take place,
even as the Congress
appropriately debates
alternatives to, and replacement
of, Obamacare.
LISA DESJARDINS: Pence gave no
specifics,
saying it's too soon.
Those who will have to wrestle
with the specifics,
rank-and-file Republicans,
focused on their
energy.
MAN: It was more a pep rally.
LISA DESJARDINS: As for a
timeline on a Republican
replacement plan, Trump
transition team member
Chris Collins and others offered
this.
REP.
CHRIS COLLINS (R), New York:
We're going to
have to, over the next six
months, put that
pen to paper.
REP.
KRISTI NOEM (R), South Dakota:
Oh, absolutely.
That's our agreed-upon agenda,
is to get it
done within six months.
We're not wholly united on one
idea right
now, but I would say we're
definitely in a
better spot than we were six
months ago.
LISA DESJARDINS: This is a good
time to explain
how Republicans plan this
repeal.
Step one, what's happening now,
is a procedural
move, not the actual repeal yet.
Both chambers will instruct
committees to
submit budget ideas by January
27.
Then, step two, inside those
budget resolutions
will be the repeal of all or
part of Obamacare.
Why budget resolutions?
They require just 51 votes in
the Senate.
So those budget plans will be
the actual repeal.
Republicans hope to do that by
March.
Step three is the replacement,
and that could
come in several pieces.
As you heard, many Republicans
want to propose
something within six months.
All of those decisions,
affecting nearly every
American, are politically
precarious.
President-elect Trump himself
warned Republicans
on Twitter today to be careful.
President Obama didn't speak
publicly at the
Capitol today.
Instead, Democratic leaders did
in a fiery
news conference, insisting
Republicans could
make things worse, a point
highlighted in
a new Trump-inspired motto.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: The
Republican plan to cut health
care wouldn't
make America great again.
It would make America sick
again, and lead
to chaos, instead of affordable
care.
LISA DESJARDINS: Democrats are,
of course,
in the minority in both
chambers, but they
were joined by one Republican
this afternoon.
Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky
voted against
the first procedural move toward
health care
repeal, citing cost concerns.
It passed without him.
And even if Rand Paul continues
to be a no
vote, Republicans have enough
votes to repeal
Obamacare.
What is not clear is if they
have enough votes
for any one replacement plan.
There will be a lot of
maneuvering and speeches
over the next couple of weeks,
but, Alison,
what is key to watch for is the
decision Republicans
make as to when the Obamacare
repeal should
take effect, quickly or over
years -- Alison.
ALISON STEWART: In the day's
other news: The
white supremacist who killed
nine black church
worshipers in Charleston, South
Carolina,
insisted he is not mentally ill.
Dylann Roof is acting as his own
lawyer for
the death penalty phase of his
federal hate
crimes trial.
In his opening statement, he
said -- quote
-- "There is nothing wrong with
me psychologically."
He didn't address his crimes,
and didn't ask
to be spared execution.
The prosecution argued that
Roof's actions
justify capital punishment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Turkey,
authorities say
they have identified the gunman
in a New Year's
Eve nightclub attack that killed
39 people.
But they didn't release the name
today, and
the killer remained at large.
Turkish police detained 20
suspects linked
to the assault, all said to be
Islamic State
militants, including 11 women.
And President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan addressed
the nation, insisting he won't
surrender to
terrorists.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): Nobody's lifestyle
is under systematic
threat in Turkey.
We will never allow this.
We haven't allowed this since we
took the
helm 14 years ago.
Anyone who claims otherwise must
prove it
with concrete examples.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Islamic State
group has
said the nightclub attack was
retaliation
for Turkish military operations
in Northern
Syria.
ALISON STEWART: A military court
in Israel
has convicted a soldier of
manslaughter for
killing a Palestinian who had
stabbed another
soldier.
Sergeant Elor Azaria shot the
attacker, who
was wounded, disarmed and laying
on the ground.
Supporters of Azaria clashed
with police outside
the courtroom today, and Prime
Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu called for Israel's
president to
grant a pardon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, president-elect
Trump announced he has chosen
Wall Street
lawyer Jay Clayton to chair the
U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission.
Clayton is noted for his
expertise in public
and private mergers and public
offerings.
ALISON STEWART: Macy's announced
today its
cutting more than 10,000 jobs
and going ahead
with plans to close 68 stores.
And on Wall Street, retailers
helped lead
the way higher.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 60
points to close at 19942.
The Nasdaq rose almost 48
points, and the
S&P 500 added nearly 13.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
part two of my discussion with
the CIA director
-- we talk about the
president-elect's distrust
of the intelligence community;
boys taken
from ISIS-held areas, never to
be heard from
again; and much more.
from ISIS-held areas, never to
be heard from
again; and much more.
We return now to my conversation
with CIA
Director John Brennan.
Last night, we focused largely
on allegations
of Russian hacking of U.S.
political operations
during the election and the war
in Syria.
Tonight, we begin with concerns
raised by
European intelligence officials
about possible
Russian intrusion in upcoming
elections there,
and whether Director Brennan
believes the
U.S. is facing a new Cold War
with Russia.
JOHN BRENNAN, CIA Director:
Well, I certainly
hope not.
And I certainly hope that,
looking out over
the next several years, the
relationship between
Moscow and Washington improves,
because it
is critically important for
global stability
for the United States and Russia
to have a
better relationship, absolutely,
and so I
fully endorse that.
However, we see that there are
still a lot
of actions that Russia is
undertaking that
undermine the principles of
democracy in so
many countries.
What has happened in our recent
election is
not new.
The Russians have engaged in
trying to manipulate
elections in Europe for a number
of years.
We see that they take advantage
of corrupt
politicians.
They will fund the parties and
groups that
support their aims.
And so there's active
exploitation and manipulation
of the political processes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But some now have
the sense
that this will all improve under
a President
Trump, that this may have just
been a feature
of the Obama administration.
JOHN BRENNAN: Oh, I don't think
it was a feature
of the Obama administration.
I think it was more a feature of
the Putin
administration in terms of what
the Russians
have been doing over the last
eight years,
and certainly before that.
This is not to say that we
cannot find ways
to be able to work together, the
United States
and Russia.
Again, I think it's critically
important that
we do.
And maybe now, with a new
administration,
there will be opportunities to
do that.
I certainly hope so.
But the facts are that the
Russians tried
to interfere in our electoral
process recently,
and were actively involved in
that.
And that is something that we
can't countenance,
because, as you point out, there
are a number
of countries in Europe that are
going to be
having elections in this year,
whether it
be Germany, France, and others.
And I must tell you, there is
level of anxiety
among my European counterparts
about what
the Russians might have up their
sleeve in
order to promote their
objectives in these
electoral processes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One other
question about the
president-elect and the
intelligence community.
He has been very critical of
parts of the
intelligence community.
Has the well already been
poisoned before
he takes office between him and
the CIA, which
he has been particularly
critical of?
What are your colleagues saying
to you about
that?
JOHN BRENNAN: The professionals
at the CIA
are very much looking forward to
having the
opportunity to demonstrate their
expertise,
their capabilities to the
incoming administration,
president-elect, vice
president-elect, and
others.
And so every time there's a
transition, the
CIA recognizes that it has a
special responsibility
and obligation to make sure
those who have
our national security in their
hands are going
to be as best informed and as
enlightened
as possible about the
complexities of world
events.
And so I know there have been a
lot of things
in the media and the press.
And I have told our folks, just
focus on your
work and look forward to the
opportunity to
brief the incoming team.
So, nothing is soured at this
point.
And I really do believe that
agency officers
are ready and looking forward to
this opportunity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A few other
important parts
of the world I want to ask you
about.
North Korea, over the weekend,
its leader,
Kim Jong-un, said that his
country is -- quote
-- "finalizing preparations of a
test launch
of an intercontinental ballistic
missile,"
which one assumes would mark --
well, would
mark an advance in Korea's
attempt to build
a nuclear weapon capable of
reaching the United
States.
Are the North Koreans as far
along as it sounds
like they are?
How much should the United
States, should
the incoming president be
concerned about
it?
JOHN BRENNAN: I think the
incoming administration
needs to be very concerned about
North Korea.
They continue to advance their
ballistic missile
capability, and as Kim Jong-un
said, even
at the intercontinental
ballistic range.
They continue to develop their
nuclear program
in terms of having nuclear
capability that
they could then marry with a
ballistic missile.
And that would be a threat and
is a threat
to regional states, as well as
potentially
to the U.S. homeland.
Obviously, the trajectory that
Pyongyang has
been on over the past two
decades, to include
the last number of years under
Kim Jong-un,
has not been a good path.
And we, the United States, along
with our
partners and allies around the
world, to include
China, which has an
extraordinary amount of
influence on North Korea, we
need to work
together to change that
trajectory, so that
North Korea doesn't pose that
threat to regional
stability, as well as to global
stability.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Your
administration has, in
effect, celebrated the nuclear
agreement with
Iran, holding off Iran's ability
to have a
breakout capability when it
comes to nuclear
weapons.
Does North Korea represent a
failure in that
regard?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, North Korea
has been embarked
on this for the last couple of
decades, it's
clear.
And there have been a number of
steps taken
to try to prevent its continued
march along
this path in terms of sanctions
and international
program and criticism and
isolation of North
Korea.
But Kim Jong-un and his father
and grandfather
before him were on this path.
And it's a -- it's an
unfortunate failure
of the international community
to find a way
to bring North Korea to its
senses, so that
it can focus on the health and
well-being
and welfare of its people, who
are impoverished,
and for him not to be able to
continue to
invest in a military capability
that is only
leading to North Korea's
continued isolation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How close is
North Korea to
being able to strike the United
States with
a nuclear weapon?
JOHN BRENNAN: To me, the fact
that he has
a ballistic missile capability
and he has
said that he is going on the
intercontinental
side of it, and he has a nuclear
capability,
to me, that's too close.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what does
that mean?
I mean...
JOHN BRENNAN: It means that we
cannot be -- we
shouldn't feel comfortable with
the continued
military capabilities and the
growth of those
capabilities in North Korea.
That needs to be addressed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What should
president-elect
Trump, once he's in office, and
your successor,
Congressman now Mike Pompeo, be
lying awake
worrying about in the months to
come, more
than anything else?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, I think it's
all these
things.
It's trying to make sure that
they understand
the complexities of the various
challenges
that are out there, whether
you're talking
about a Ukraine or Iraq or Syria
or North
Korea or any of the issues we
deal with cyber
and terrorism.
These are complex and
complicated issues.
And they're not -- they don't
lend themselves
to easy and simple solutions.
And also, in my experience, the
past five,
eight years or so, the number of
these challenges
continues to go up.
And so it's not just
complexities of these
issues.
It's the simultaneity of it.
And the United States is the
global superpower,
remains so.
And what they need to worry
about is how are
they going to ensure that
they're able to
monitor what's going on around
the world,
protect U.S. national security
interests,
not overcommit, and also make
sure that the
policy course that they stake
out is one that
has near-term interests in mind,
but also
longer-term strategic goals and
objectives
of the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you believe
they're up to
that challenge?
JOHN BRENNAN: I believe that any
administration
that comes in, I think,
sometimes is taken
aback by the scope, the scale,
the complexity
of the problems.
I was part of the incoming Obama
administration,
and I had served in government
before.
And I must tell you, once you
have that responsibility,
it's rather daunting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And where will
John Brennan
be?
JOHN BRENNAN: I will be on the
sidelines,
will be finishing up on
Inauguration Day.
And this is the absolute best
job that I could
ever imagine.
And so this will be my last job
in government.
But I will be doing what I can
to support
our national security from the
sidelines.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Brennan, the
director
of the CIA, thank you very much
for joining
us.
JOHN BRENNAN: Thank you, Judy.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
my entire
interview with Director Brennan
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now we explore the widening rift
between the
president-elect and the
intelligence community.
After we recorded the Brennan
interview yesterday,
Mr. Trump tweeted: "The
'intelligence' briefing
on so-called 'Russian hacking'
was delayed
until Friday.
Perhaps more time need to build
a case.
Very strange!"
Well, that briefing, it was
widely reported,
was always scheduled for Friday.
For more on this divide, or what
appears to
be a divide, we turn to James
Woolsey.
He was the CIA director during
the Clinton
administration.
He is now at Booz Allen, a major
defense contractor,
and he is a senior adviser to
the Trump transition.
And Jeffrey Smith, he's a former
general counsel
at the CIA.
He currently serves on the
Department of Defense
Legal Policy Advisory Board.
And we welcome both of you to
the "NewsHour."
So I'm going to start with you,
James Woolsey.
These tweets that we're quoting
from Donald
Trump are just the latest in a
series of statements
he's made dismissing either the
CIA or the
intelligence agency.
What does he -- you're advising
the transition.
What does he really think of the
professionals
in the intelligence community?
JAMES WOOLSEY, Former CIA
Director: I think
he's got an open mind.
I think we need to have some
things take place
which haven't taken place yet.
He needs to get to know the top
people in
the agency.
I think they need to go the
extra mile in
order to present things to him
in a way that
he wants.
He doesn't want the morning
briefing, apparently.
Well, neither did Bill Clinton
when I was
director of central
intelligence.
He read the briefing and asked
questions sometimes.
So there's not any one way to do
that.
But the point is that they need
to find out
what will help him get into this
very important
job quickly and effectively and
plan their
presentations that way, rather
than complaining,
frankly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jeffrey Smith,
what do you
make of what we have heard,
really just a
stream of critical comments by
Donald Trump
about the intelligence
community, the CIA
and the rest of it?
JEFFREY SMITH, Former CIA
General Counsel:
I find them deeply disturbing
and potentially
very dangerous.
They're disturbing because he
seems to be
saying, I don't trust the
intelligence community.
And I don't know quite why he
believes that.
We all understand they have made
mistakes
in the past, but I think they
have also understand
how important it is to get it
right.
So I think he's prejudging them
a little bit.
And I think they're dangerous
because he's
set in motion all kinds of
potential conflicts
down the road and some
uncertainty with our
allies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It may go further
than criticism.
We are just tonight seeing,
literally just
in the last few minutes, Jim
Woolsey and Jeffrey
Smith, a report in The Wall
Street Journal
that a source close to Donald
Trump, the Trump
transition, is saying that he's
looking at
restructuring the entire
intelligence community,
frankly, overhauling the CIA.
Is it your understand
understanding that that's
what he may be up to?
JAMES WOOLSEY: There's been talk
about this
not just within the Trump
transition, but
around the community now for
some months,
verging into years.
Part of the reason is that the
director of
national intelligence, which
does the sort
of chairman of the board job
that used to
be done by the director of
central intelligence,
as well as managing the CIA,
that sort of
chairman of the board job was
done more or
less by 18, 19 people when I was
director
back in the '93-'94 time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JAMES WOOLSEY: It's now done in
one way or
another by 2,000 or 3,000.
And there has been a huge surge
in numbers
of people in the community as a
whole, not
just at the CIA, and I think
they're going
to, understandably, take a look
at that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Jeffrey
Smith, we don't
know -- again, this report just
came out by
The Wall Street Journal, and the
person, the
source is not named.
But what would an overhaul like
that mean?
JEFFREY SMITH: Well, I agree
with Jim.
If the size of the ODNI staff
could be reduced
and streamlined, I think that's
good.
It has become overhead that is
largely unnecessary.
And the story also suggests that
CIA should
do more in the field.
I think that's probably right.
But I also think that it's wise
for an administration
to come in and take the measure
of things
before they start reshuffling
everything,
because a huge amount of effort
would be spent
on reorganizing things at a time
when that
energy would be better spent, it
seems to
me, on addressing the crises
that exist in
the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But I want to
come back, Jim
Woolsey, to what Donald Trump
has been saying.
He's siding -- frankly, appears
to be siding
with Julian Assange of WikiLeaks
over the
CIA, pretty much dismissing the
CIA and the
entire intelligence community
finding that
the Russians were behind this
hacking of the
Democrats during the election.
Do we have any precedent for an
incoming president
of the United States having this
much disregard
for the entire intelligence
community?
JAMES WOOLSEY: Well, I don't
know that it's
disregard.
It certainly is raising issues.
There's no doubt about is that.
Donald Trump does that in his
own way.
He raised issues in a way that
turned out
to be very successful for him
politically,
got him elected president of the
United States,
when virtually everybody that he
talked to
said you can't raise issues that
way.
So I think we all need to take
half a step
back and look at the fact that
he handles
things like this differently
than a lot of
other people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me stop and
ask Jeffrey
Smith.
What Jim Woolsey said a few
moments ago was
that the intelligence community
needs find
another way to come to Donald
Trump.
If he doesn't like the way the
current briefings
are structured, they need to
find another
way to do it.
Could that be a solution here?
JEFFREY SMITH: That could help.
However it's done matters less
than they need
to convince the president, their
new boss,
that they can be trusted.
And he needs to work to develop
their trust.
This has to be a mutual
understanding of trust
between both sides, because
there's going
to be some crisis very early in
the administration,
and the president is going to
rely on what
he hears from the intelligence
community.
And if he has been saying before
he became
president that they can't be
trusted, what
does he say to the American
people now that
I'm relying on them to make
recommendations
to take action?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Jim Woolsey,
I think that's
the question, because if
something comes up
and Donald Trump has declared
that he doesn't
trust the CIA, what does that
mean?
JAMES WOOLSEY: Well, I think
those -- some
things like that can be
surmounted by spending
some time together and so forth.
I don't think that's the main
problem.
The main problem is that I think
the entire
leadership, not just the
president-elect himself,
but the entire leadership in the
national
security area needs to realize
that one of
the most important things you're
going to
do in this job is deal with
crises of one
sort or another.
And in crises, it has
historically been the
case that almost always the
first reports
are wrong.
You cannot deal with them by
making a quick
judgment based on the first
things that you
hear, even though they sound --
if they sound
reasonable.
The Tonkin Gulf resolution is
one example
of something that was taken off
of a non-occurrence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That sounds like
a warning
to the incoming administration.
What other advice would you
have, just quickly,
Jeffrey Smith?
JEFFREY SMITH: Mr. Trump has had
an extraordinary
business career, but dealing
with sovereign
states with nuclear weapons is
fundamentally
different than building a golf
course in Scotland.
He has to understand that he has
huge responsibilities.
He has to be extremely careful
about what
he says.
He has to listen to those
terrific professionals
in the intelligence community,
the diplomatic
community, the military
community.
They have to begin to trust him,
and he has
to begin to trust them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jeffrey Smith,
Jim Woolsey,
we thank you both.
JAMES WOOLSEY: Good to be with
you, as always.
JEFFREY SMITH: Thank you.
ALISON STEWART: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
protests against
Senator Jeff Sessions, Donald
Trump's pick
for attorney general; and the
potential for
nuclear technology to lower
carbon emissions.
But first: For nearly three
months, Iraqi
forces backed by the U.S. have
been fighting
to re-take the ISIS-held city of
Mosul.
The militants still hold much of
the city
and its nearly one million
residents.
Almost 130,000 people have fled
Mosul since
the battle began.
Security officials are now
trying to harbor
the displaced, while also
containing the spread
of ISIS.
But the process of screening and
detaining
men and boys who have left to
ensure they
are not extremists is fraught
and controversial.
From Northern Iraq, special
correspondent
Marcia Biggs and videographer
Eric O'Conner
(ph) report.
MARCIA BIGGS: It's a slow and
steady exodus,
civilians fleeing the battle for
Mosul.
Those who make it to the
relative safety of
Iraqi checkpoints tell harrowing
stories.
MAN (through translator): A
mortar landed
on my house, destroyed it, and
killed my wife.
We had no place to bury her, and
now our daughter
has no mother.
MARCIA BIGGS: The danger of
Mosul behind them,
they are first screened by
Iraqis, then boarded
onto buses for a journey into
the unknown.
WOMAN (through translator): The
shelling destroyed
us.
All our houses are gone now.
Nothing remains for us.
MARCIA BIGGS: Do you know where
you're going?
WOMAN (through translator): I
don't know,
but they are saying that they
are taking us
to the tents.
MARCIA BIGGS: They're heading to
a handful
of camps for internally
displaced people here
in Iraqi-held Kurdistan.
It's a long wait.
They're facing a bottleneck from
previous
buses as the newly arrived
register and receive
supplies, and, at every stage,
more screening.
Both Iraqi security forces and
the Kurdish
authorities have a mandate to
keep members
of ISIS from escaping through
the mass of
civilians fleeing the battle,
and they have
gathered intelligence on tens of
thousands
of ISIS suspects, creating a
database with
a list of names.
Everywhere we went in the camps,
we heard
the same story.
WOMAN (through translator): I
only have one
son.
They took him 20 days ago.
We don't know where he is.
He went to get gas and they just
took him.
He's innocent.
MARCIA BIGGS: Aziza says she and
her 18-year-old
son, Radwan, escaped Mosul, only
to be ripped
apart by local authorities once
they arrived
at the camp.
WOMAN (through translator): Oh,
my son.
I feel safe here, but I feel sad
because he's
not here.
The tent is empty.
It's been 20 days since they
took him.
I'm cold and empty without him.
MARCIA BIGGS: This man wouldn't
let us show
his face, but says his cousin
was arrested,
based on what he says was the
word of an informer
in the camp.
BELKIS WILLE, Human Rights
Watch: In Mosul,
we have got thousands of
individuals being
screened, subsequently being
detained, and
disappearing.
MARCIA BIGGS: Belkis Wille is
with Human Rights
Watch, based in Iraq.
BELKIS WILLE: Now, all of them
might be in
official detention facilities,
and maybe the
moment the operation is done, we
will see
a lot of these people released.
But, for the moment, we don't
know that, and
all their families know is that
they have
gone missing.
MARCIA BIGGS: General Najim
al-Jabouri is
one of Iraq's top commanders in
the battle
for Mosul, and his men are the
first line
of screening for civilians
coming out of ISIS
control.
They detain anyone who appears
on the list,
even though he knows some may
not be hard-line
is members.
GEN.
NAJIM AL-JABOURI, Iraq: I hope
the prime minister
give amnesty to the majority of
the people,
join ISIS, but they not kill,
they not involved
in very bad thing.
They just to took some salary to
keep them
and families from revenge of
ISIS.
You know, ISIS don't have any
mercy.
MARCIA BIGGS: They're just
trying to stay
alive and feed their families.
GEN.
NAJIM AL-JABOURI: Yes, yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: Is there ever
anyone that's
on that list that you say he's
just someone
who's trying to get by, let's
let him go?
GEN.
NAJIM AL-JABOURI: Yes, sure.
Yes, sure.
But the judge will decide that,
not me.
I fight in the field.
Anyone stand in front of me and
fight me,
I kill him.
But after the field, this the
mission of the
judge.
MARCIA BIGGS: We traveled south
of Mosul to
Qayyarah, where, under the black
cloud of
oil fires set by ISIS, we found
one of those
judges, whose job is to
investigate the cases
of ISIS suspects and prepare
them for trial.
How many people are on the list?
We heard 40,000?
AMER ABDULLAH KHODIR, Judge
(through translator):
No, there are more than 40,000
who are not
arrested yet.
MARCIA BIGGS: How do you
differentiate between
someone who is just trying to
make ends meet
in occupied Mosul, and someone
who is an ISIS
terrorist?
AMER ABDULLAH KHODIR (through
translator):
We have people who are helping
us identify
the individuals who were just
doing their
job, without being members of
ISIS.
BELKIS WILLE: The real question
for us is,
how do you get onto that list?
It's allegations that you are
affiliated with
ISIS, but they could be made by
your neighbor,
your neighbor who envies your
land or your
neighbor who had a feud with you
for many
years.
MARCIA BIGGS: The judge denies
that charges
can be based solely on witness
testimony,
but admits that the system is
bogged down.
AMER ABDULLAH KHODIR (through
translator):
It will take a long time to
complete these
cases.
In most of the cases, the
victims' bodies
are missing.
They were kidnapped by ISIS
terrorists, killed
and disappeared.
We have to find the bodies, but
this will
prolong the investigations.
MARCIA BIGGS: For the families
of those that
languish in detention, it's a
reminder of
abuses against Sunnis that took
place last
spring, when Iraqi forces retook
Fallujah
from ISIS, but then allowed Shia
militias
to control those villages.
BELKIS WILLE: We know the
history of previous
operations, and we know that
hundreds of people
have gone missing.
We're not saying let everybody
go.
What we're saying is, there are
simple things
you can do to try and decrease
the chance
of abuse afterwards.
One of those things is informing
family members
of where their loved ones are.
The other is putting out public
numbers.
Why have we not seen the
authorities put out
a single public number on how
many people
are being detained in this
operation?
MARCIA BIGGS: This is your
husband, Zaojek?
Back in the camp, 27-year-old
Miad shows me
the only picture she has of her
husband, Ramy.
She says they had been here for
10 days when
he went to camp security to get
permission
for her to see a doctor.
He never came back.
MIAD, Lives in Camp (through
translator):
The night that they arrested
him, I waited
up until midnight, but he didn't
come.
I went to the camp manager.
He said it's a normal
investigation, and he
will be back soon, it will only
take a couple
of days.
That was 17 days ago.
I remember they put his name in
the database
two times, and they didn't find
anything on
him.
He was cleared.
He doesn't have anything to do
with ISIS.
MARCIA BIGGS: She's here alone
with her two
children and her 80-year-old
grandmother.
Diagnosed with uterine cancer,
she has special
permission to go to her
chemotherapy appointments,
but like everyone else, is
otherwise forbidden
to leave the camp.
MIAD (through translator): I
went to the camp
security and he didn't give me
any information.
They just told me, if he is
innocent, we will
bring him back to you.
If he's guilty, don't ask about
him.
MARCIA BIGGS: Halkwat Rafaat is
in charge
of security at the camps in this
area, in
total hosting almost 60,000
people.
Why they are not allowed to
leave the camp?
HALKWAT RAFAAT, Iraq (through
translator):
Because they have been under is
control for
more than two years.
MARCIA BIGGS: And you are
worried that maybe
there may be ISIS fighters
hiding in plaint
sight?
HALKWAT RAFAAT (through
translator): Of course
they are.
MARCIA BIGGS: What do you say to
the officials
that say, we have got a real
security problem;
we can't let people leave?
BELKIS WILLE: If the screening
processes are
not working, then improve the
screening processes.
But once someone's been cleared
through that
process, it is unacceptable to
be holding
them in a camp that is
essentially being used
as a prison.
MARCIA BIGGS: Miad says she now
wishes she
had never left Mosul.
MIAD (through translator): I
need my husband
by my side.
When I am sick, he takes care of
the kids,
and makes sure we have food.
But now I have no one, only God
and my two
kids.
My life here is very hard.
If I had known they would arrest
my husband,
I never would have left my
village.
MARCIA BIGGS: Some residents
held out.
Iraqi armed forces had cleared
this village
in North Mosul 20 days ago when
we arrived,
and the civilians here chose not
to go to
the camps.
But now that the Iraqi army
controls this
area, checkpoints are
everywhere, and no one
goes in or out without special
permission.
They say they're grateful to be
rid of ISIS,
but say there is no clean water,
no electricity,
not enough food.
MAN (through translator): We
have received
food only two times in the last
two weeks.
We need gas for the generators.
We don't want to go to the
camps.
We want to stay here to keep
what is ours.
MARCIA BIGGS: Half-an-hour
later, we were
at a former ISIS bomb factory
looking at some
vehicles that ISIS left behind.
We were hustled to a nearby home
to wait out
the shelling.
So we just received a mortar
from around five
to six kilometers away.
The general believes that
perhaps one of the
civilians that saw us talking to
all of the
neighbors may have given
information to ISIS
that we were here, which is why
we have received
this mortar.
There is no way to know for sure
if someone
informed on us, but it is a
reminder that,
even in so-called liberated
areas, there is
still a very real war being
fought.
Those who choose to stay may
keep their homes
and their dignity, but they now
live in a
state of limbo between ISIS and
the Iraqi
army, and with that comes
suspicion and danger.
Eight more rounds hit areas
around us that
afternoon.
This local villager emerged from
his home
carrying a white flag and
begging the army
to let him take his family to
the next village.
He was told to stay in his home.
Back in the camp, Miad may be
out of the line
of fire, but she faces every day
alone, no
information, no answers.
MIAD (through translator): God
willing, he
will come back to us.
I am not the only one.
Too many others have been taken
who have nothing
to do with ISIS.
MARCIA BIGGS: For now, all she
can do is wait.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Marcia Biggs,
outside Mosul, Northern Iraq.
ALISON STEWART: The confirmation
hearings
for president-elect Trump's
controversial
pick for U.S. attorney general,
Alabama Senator
Jeff Sessions, are next week,
but already
his detractors are making
themselves heard.
The NAACP mounted protests
across Alabama
on Tuesday against the Sessions
nomination.
In Mobile, the group's national
president,
Cornell Brooks, and five others
staged a sit-in
at the senator's local office.
They were finally arrested for
trespassing,
when they refused to leave as
the office closed
last night.
Meanwhile, more than 1,100 law
professors
wrote to leaders of the Senate
Judiciary Committee,
and said, in part -- quote --
"Nothing in
Senator Sessions' public life
since 1986 has
convinced us that he is a
different man than
the 39-year-old attorney who was
deemed too
racially insensitive to be a
federal judge."
Sessions' own Senate career
began 20 years
ago, but that failed
confirmation battle still
echoes in this new fight.
The NAACP and others cite at
least three reasons
to disqualify him as attorney
general, on
voting rights, his support for
stricter I.D.
laws and criticism of the 1965
Voting Rights
Act, on civil rights, claims
Sessions has
repeatedly supported attempts to
overturn
desegregation.
On criminal justice reform, the
NAACP Highlights
his opposition to consent
decrees to reform
police departments.
All of this comes to a head next
week, at
Sessions' confirmation hearings.
The big question is, what kind
of attorney
general could Sessions be?
For an idea, let's take closer
look at his
record in the Senate, as well as
his career
as a prosecutor in Alabama.
We are joined by John Sharp, a
reporter for
the Alabama Media Group, and
Sari Horwitz.
She covers the Department of
Justice for The
Washington Post.
John, I want to start with you.
Jefferson Beauregard Sessions
III has never
lost an election.
So over the course of his career
as a prosecutor,
as Alabama's attorney general,
and as a senator,
what contributes to his
popularity back at
home in Alabama?
JOHN SHARP, Alabama Media Group:
Well, he
stayed true to his roots over
the years.
He's an ultraconservative
politician, and
he's never really wavered from
that.
And Alabama is one of the
reddest of the red
states.
It has supported a GOP
presidential candidate
since 1980.
It's only getting redder.
Donald Trump's returns on
November 8 were
the most that a presidential
candidate's had
in Alabama since Richard Nixon
in 1972.
So Senator Sessions has -- you
know, he's
been a darling for the
conservative movement
in Alabama.
And he has a spotless election
record.
His conservative viewpoints on
anything from
gun control to immigration
reform to religious
liberty has really sold well
with the conservative
voters here in this state who
turn out and
dominate on Election Days.
ALISON STEWART: What's an
example of a way
he stayed true to his roots on
the local level?
JOHN SHARP: Back in the early
2000s, he -- The
Mobile Press-Register at the
time ran a series
of stories about dental services
in underserved
areas, in small rural counties.
And Senator Sessions, he saw
those stories.
He was interested in them.
And he traveled around to
various county where's
these clinics were located and
people weren't
receiving dental services.
And, you know, he made quite a
high-profile
splash at the time, at least on
a local level,
about wanting to get federal
money set aside
for some of these clinics to
help support
them and provide services for
folks at the
time that were not receiving
them.
ALISON STEWART: Sari, when
Sessions was the
U.S. attorney for the Southern
District of
Alabama, he was described by one
paper as
an in-the-trenches prosecutor.
On the national level, how does
he work as
a senator?
SARI HORWITZ, The Washington
Post: Well, he's
very respected by his
colleagues.
He's courteous and friendly.
And he works well in the Senate.
He's been there for 20 years.
But he's really known for some
very extreme
views on immigration, hard-line
views on immigration.
And, in some cases, he's
actually struck out
in opposition to his Republican
colleagues
and spoken out against
legislation, especially
on immigration, that was
supported by his
Republican colleagues.
ALISON STEWART: John, when
Sessions was up
for a federal judgeship in the
1980s, he had
some very tough hearings.
There was testimony that he
called another
attorney, a black attorney boy,
that he joked
about the KKK, that he had
disparaging words
about the NAACP and the ACLU.
He obviously didn't get that
post.
How did that play pack home?
JOHN SHARP: Well, that was an
initial setback
for Senator Sessions, but it
played -- it
played really well back at home.
At the time, the people that
were opposing
Senator Sessions were some of
the big names
of the Democratic Party back
then, Ted Kennedy,
Joe Biden, Senator Paul Simon
from Illinois.
And folks back home in Alabama
saw that and
looked upon the whole situation
as, well,
it's us vs. them.
ALISON STEWART: Jeff Sessions
was one of the
first senators, if not the first
senator,
to support candidate Trump.
And it's such an interesting
mix.
You have this millionaire from
New York and
this down-to-his-roots son of
the South.
Where do they meet?
SARI HORWITZ: You're right.
He was actually the first
senator in February
to endorse Donald Trump.
They met several years ago.
Donald Trump came to testify on
Capitol Hill,
and they really hit it off.
They're both -- they both have
deeply conservative
views.
They see the world the same way.
They see the world as sort of
divided between
working class and the elites.
Senator Sessions refers to the
elites as masters
of the universe.
I think both Donald Trump and
Senator Sessions
see themselves, they position
themselves as
champions of the working class.
ALISON STEWART: Sari, almost two
years ago,
Jeff Sessions was on the Hill,
and he was
addressing attorney general
candidate Loretta
Lynch, and he said this:
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS (R), Alabama: You
will have
to tell the president yes or no
on something
that he may want to do.
Are you able and willing to tell
the president
of the United States no if he
asks to -- permission
or a legal opinion that supports
an action
you believe is wrong?
ALISON STEWART: Sari, has Jeff
Sessions ever
been in that position, when he's
had to go
against the grain, when he's had
to say no
or yes to something like that?
SARI HORWITZ: I remember that
moment when
he said that to Loretta Lynch,
and he actually
ended up voting against Loretta
Lynch, partially
because of her answer, which was
that she
supported President Obama's
executive actions
on immigration.
Jeff Sessions himself has gone
against the
grain, but it's really been in
the Senate,
again, against his own party,
when he took
on views on immigration that
were opposed
by other Republicans.
As I said, the Republicans
backed and Democrats
in 2013 backed an immigration
bill, and he
spoke out strongly against it.
So he has gone against the grain
when he really,
deeply believes in something, as
he does on
immigration.
ALISON STEWART: Sari, Senator
Sessions has
described the attorney general's
position
as, he or she set the tone for
law enforcement
in America.
Do we have any idea what his
tone might be
based on his actions as senator?
SARI HORWITZ: You know, it's
hard to say how
he will be as attorney general,
but civil
rights groups are very
concerned.
And this is what we have seen in
the last
couple of days, the NAACP
Staging a sit-in
in Mobile, Alabama, six people
arrested, the
ACLU today coming out with a big
report critical
of Jeff Sessions.
They don't take a position a
candidate, for
or against, but very critical,
because they're
worried about what he will be
like as attorney
general, especially in the area
of civil rights.
They're worried about the Civil
Rights Division
that under Eric Holder and
Loretta Lynch enforced
strongly the Voting Rights Act
and oversight
of police departments.
The Justice Department in the
last couple
years has sued many police
departments across
America and forced reforms in
civil liberties
for police departments.
And they have sued two states,
specifically
North Carolina and Texas, on the
Voting Rights
Act.
ALISON STEWART: Sari Horwitz of
The Washington
Post, and John Sharp from the
Alabama Media
Group, thank you so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: why some
engineers and
investors are making big bets to
develop a
new generation of nuclear
reactors.
Miles O'Brien has the story.
It was a co-production with our
friends at
PBS "NOVA" tied to the January
11 documentary
"The Nuclear Option."
His story is part of our weekly
series the
Leading Edge.
MILES O'BRIEN: This is where
nuclear power
began.
Welcome to the Idaho National
Laboratory.
It covers a vast swathe of high
desert nearly
the size of Rhode Island.
It is dotted with experimental
nuclear reactors
that wrote the textbooks on how
to generate
power by splitting atoms.
And now a new chapter is being
written here.
MARK PETERS, Director, Idaho
National Laboratory:
If we're going to mitigate
climate change,
we have to think about how to
develop new
nuclear.
MILES O'BRIEN: Laboratory
director Mark Peters
says concerns about climate
change have brought
his industry out of a long
nuclear winter.
MARK PETERS: We're restarting
and testing
infrastructure to start to
develop the next
generation of nuclear power.
So I'm just incredibly excited
about the fact
that we're finally starting to
get a public
dialogue going now that it's
important to
build the next generation.
MILES O'BRIEN: The Bush and
Obama administrations
and Congress have concurred on
that point.
Together, they authorized tens
of billions
in loan guarantees for nuclear
plant construction,
and tens of millions in funding
to develop
what's known as Generation IV
technology.
MARK PETERS: Generation IV are
future reactors
that are based on different
concepts, different
core designs, different
coolants.
MILES O'BRIEN: And perhaps his
most promising
client is an innovator from
another industry.
Microsoft founder Bill Gates is
among a handful
of entrepreneurs with seemingly
bottomless
pockets making big bets on
nuclear power.
In a 2010 TED Talk, he announced
he had co-founded
a company called TerraPower.
His partner is his former chief
technology
officer at Microsoft, Nathan
Myhrvold.
NATHAN MYHRVOLD, TerraPower: We
need to have
base load carbon-free power, and
nuclear is
a great example of something
that is base
load carbon-free power.
Base load means seven by 24, day
and night,
whenever, it's going to be
there.
MILES O'BRIEN: TerraPower's
reactor uses a
design that dates back to the
first ever nuclear
power plant, built here in
Idaho.
It illuminated its first
lightbulbs in 1951.
It's an entirely different
design than the
vast majority of nuclear
reactors currently
operating.
The fuel wasn't cooled with
water, but, rather,
liquid metal, sodium mixed with
potassium,
which has a lower melting point,
absorbs more
heat, and has a much higher
boiling point
than water.
It had some inherent safety
advantages over
water-cooled reactors, which
cannot safely
shut down without electricity
from the grid
to keep cooling pumps running.
This is what happened at
Fukushima in 2011.
An earthquake and tsunami caused
a station
blackout that also destroyed
backup generators
and batteries.
The reactors overheated and
three melted down.
MAN: It's now about five minutes
until test
time.
MILES O'BRIEN: Twenty-five years
earlier in
Idaho, engineers staged a
prescient demonstration
of the Fukushima scenario in a
sodium reactor.
They deliberately shut off the
coolant flow.
In a water-cooled reactor, like
Fukushima,
this would have caused an
explosion, but this
reactor safely shut itself down.
MARK PETERS: It reaches a
certain temperature,
and the reaction automatically
shuts down,
and the reactor cools down by
itself.
MILES O'BRIEN: Sodium reactors
do not need
the equivalent of premium gas,
refined or
enriched uranium.
In fact, TerraPower says it can
run its reactors
on the leftovers from
enrichment, depleted
uranium.
The biggest stockpile in the
U.S. is here
in Paducah, Kentucky, at a
uranium enrichment
plant.
NATHAN MYHRVOLD: With our
reactors, Paducah,
Kentucky becomes the energy
capital of the
United States, because Paducah
alone has enough
of this low-level nuclear waste,
the depleted
uranium, that we could run all
of America's
electricity needs for 750 years.
MAN: This is a model of the
Navy's first nuclear-powered
submarine, the Nautilus.
MILES O'BRIEN: The seeds of the
decline for
liquid metal reactors were
planted by Admiral
Hyman Rickover, the father of
the nuclear
Navy.
MAN: This is the reactor or the
atomic pile.
There is uranium in here.
MILES O'BRIEN: He selected
nuclear reactors
cooled with water to propel the
Nautilus,
the first nuclear-powered
submarine.
For utilities, adapting the
nuclear Navy technology
for use on land offered the
fastest path to
market.
Water-cooled nuclear reactors
quickly became
the norm all over the world.
EDWIN LYMAN, Union of Concerned
Scientists:
I think that there was a victory
on the merits
here, and the other reactor
designs did have
the opportunity to prove
themselves, and they
fell short.
MILES O'BRIEN: Physicist Edwin
Lyman is with
the Union of Concerned
Scientists.
He says the promise of this new
generation
of nukes should be tempered by
the uncertainties.
EDWIN LYMAN: Some
non-water-cooled systems
have a lower risk of certain
types of accident,
but they have greater risks of
other kinds
of accidents, or they introduce
other security
or safety issues, so there's
really no free
lunch here.
MILES O'BRIEN: But the private
sector is apparently
not dissuaded.
A D.C.-based think tank, Third
Way, found
more than 40 startups across the
U.S. developing
advanced nuclear power designs.
These atomic business plans have
lured more
than a billion dollars in
investment.
LESLIE DEWAN, Transatomic Power:
I think a
lot of it might just be the
changing demographics
of nuclear engineers, that now
there are a
large number of young nuclear
engineers who
think, I have a really good
idea.
I'm going to raise some funding.
I'm going to see if I can do
this on my own.
How much do you have to worry
about free fluorine?
MILES O'BRIEN: Leslie Dewan is
one of the
young entrepreneurs leading this
revolution.
She became enamored with some
nuclear technology
first developed 50 years ago at
the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory.
It's called a molten salt
reactor, not table
salt, liquid fluoride salts.
LESLIE DEWAN: A molten salt
reactor uses liquid
fuel, rather than solid fuel.
MILES O'BRIEN: Having uranium
dissolved in
liquid offers some safety
advantages.
If the fuel gets too hot, the
liquid expands,
and the uranium atoms become too
dispersed
to maintain a nuclear chain
reaction.
It shuts itself down.
And in the case of a station
blackout, like
Fukushima, the liquid fuel
drains into a larger
tank, where it cools down
passively, no electricity
needed.
At Oak Ridge, they successfully
ran and tested
a molten salt reactor for four
years, and
it worked.
But building a reactor that can
withstand
something as corrosive as a very
hot bath
of salt is a huge engineering
challenge.
At Oak Ridge, the funding ended
before they
could work on that.
So, the corrosion problem is the
focus of
early testing for Leslie Dewan's
startup company,
Transatomic.
LESLIE DEWAN: We can make
something that works
for five years, that works for
10 years.
Like, that, we certainly know.
What we are trying to figure out
now is whether
we can use newer materials or
new methods
of corrosion control to extend
the lifetime
of the facility, because,
ultimately, we care
about making this low-cost.
If you have to replace your key
components
every 10 years, it's not going
to be cheaper
than coal.
And if it's not cheaper than
coal, then it's
not worth doing.
MILES O'BRIEN: Without a tax, or
a cap, on
carbon emissions, matching the
cost of fossil
fuels will likely be an
impossible order for
these new nuclear designs.
EDWIN LYMAN: We don't put a lot
of stock in
seeing an alternative to a
water-cooled reactor
being developed anytime soon,
certainly not
quickly enough to make a dent in
the greenhouse
gas problem.
MILES O'BRIEN: But, in Idaho,
they are pressing
forward with urgency.
In the U.S., there are currently
about 100
nuclear reactors in operation.
The majority of them are slated
for retirement
in the 2030s.
What will replace them?
Wind and solar?
Not without a breakthrough in
battery technology
to store power on the grid.
NATHAN MYHRVOLD: The fate of the
whole planet
depends on us renewing our
energy system with
renewables and with nuclear.
And if we step back from that,
we are going
to create a tremendous problem
for future
generations.
MILES O'BRIEN: Worries about
waste, weapons
proliferation and safety nearly
derailed nuclear
energy in the past.
But the quest to meet rising
demand for energy,
without wrecking the planet, has
put new nuclear
technology back on the agenda.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," at the
Idaho National Laboratory.
ALISON STEWART: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And...
ALISON STEWART: I'm Alison
Stewart.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sorry.
I stepped on you.
And I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening, when I sit down at the
White house
with Vice President Biden.
For all of us at the "NewsHour,"
thank you,
and good night.
For all of us at the "NewsHour,"
thank you,
and good night.